RFD-XXXX Teleport Release Engineering (#23977)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/XXXX-teleport-release-engineering.md

builds, local testing and so on. Essentially, any task downstream from an engineer
typing code into an editor must be considered to some extent, because all of these
tasks have such a substantial overlap with release actiovities that to try and 
construct any sort of release process without considering them will produce an
unworkable solution.

## Why

The Teleport delivery process and its associated tooling has evolved largely 
organically, and there are no over-arching principles that we adhere to when
making Release Engineering decisions. This makes it increasingly difficult
to either change the release system, or to assess the impact of a proposed
change.

## A limited survey of our build artifacts

It may be useful to begin with a brief tour of the artifacts we currently
build. Below is a trace for the OSS subset of the artifacts we produce for
each release build - it does not include
 * Enterprise builds, 
 * FIPS-compliant builds, plugins, 
 * documentation & website builds,
 * Teleport Labs images, etc
 
It also doesn't attempt to capture the differing requirements for storing and/or publishing the various artefacts as they are built and promoted.

```mermaid

> flowchart LR

Author: But yeah, we have so many artefacts and some of them are used as input for second and third-order artifacts themselves. We can't keep track of this in our heads any more.

    to deliver a release, in order to mitigate supply chain attacks

We also want some functional requirements:

 1. An engineer *must* be able to at least construct a Teleport binary at their 
    desk with a minimum of fuss.
 2. An engineer *must* be able to run close to 100% of all tests at their desk
    with a minimum of fuss 
 3. The release envirionment should be as close as practical to the CI 
    environment, ideally the same. We don't want surprises come release time. 
 4. An engineer should be able to cut a debug or testing release at any time 
    using the proper release procedure and tooling. Especially if that release
    will travel outside the Teleport organisation.

Non-functional requirements:

### Suggestions

#### **Draw some boundaries**

One cause of the complexity in our build system is that we have not (in the
last 2 years at least) collectively sat down and thought about what we want
our Delivery system to *be*. What is its *purpose*, and what boundaries can
we put on it.

Some open questions are:

 - What tasks should an engineer be able to do at their desk?
   - Build binaries
   - Run Tests
 - Where is the boundary between
   - Desk/CI

>    - Desk/Delivery

Author: What would "unsigned release artifacts" contain in this case? Is it just the first-order tarballs, or do you include docker images, Debian packages, AMIs, etc?

>    - Desk/Delivery

Reviewer: > What would "unsigned release artifacts" contain in this case? 

The dividing line to me is "what can be built on a single machine".  Native binaries are out. AMIs are out.

*  first-order binaries, yes
*  release tarball (or their moral equivalent on the target platform), yes
*  docker images, yes
*  debian packages, yes
*  AMIs - no -- this would require aws access and runnning stuff off the machine

    oss_amd64_deb(OSS amd64 Debian Package)
    oss_amd64_rpm(OSS amd64 RPM Package)
    oss_teleport_ami(OSS amd64 AMI)

    oss_binaries_linux_arm64(OSS Linux\narm64 Tarball)
    oss_arm64_deb(OSS arm64 Debian Package)
    oss_arm64_rpm(OSS arm64 RPM Package)

    oss_amd64_centos7(OSS RHEL/Centos7\namd64 Tarball)

    oss_multiarch_distroless_oci(OSS Multiarch Distroless\nOCI Container Image)
    oss_multiarch_distroless_debug_oci(OSS Multiarch Distroless\nDebug OCI Container Image)

    oss_binaries_linux_i386(OSS Linux\ni386 32-bit Tarball)
    oss_i386_deb(OSS i386 32-bit Debian Package)
    oss_i386_rpm(OSS i386 32-bit RPM Package)

    oss_binaries_linux_arm32(OSS Linux\narm7 32-bit Tarball)
    oss_arm32_deb(OSS arm7 32-bit Debian Package)
    oss_arm32_rpm(OSS arm7 32-bit RPM Package)

    oss_darwin_amd64(OSS Darwin\namd64 Binaries)
    style oss_darwin_amd64 stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    darwin_oss_pkg_installer(macOS .pkg Installer)
    darwin_tsh_only_pkg_installer(tsh-only Signed\nmacOS .pkg Installer)
    darwin_signed_tarball(OSS Darwin amd64\nSigned Tarball)
    darwin_unsigned_tarball(OSS Darwin amd64\nUnsigned Tarball)

>     darwin_teleport_connect_dmg(Teleport Connect\n.dmg Installer)

Author: Added

    
    oss_amd64_deb --> oss_multiarch_distroless_oci
    oss_amd64_deb --> oss_multiarch_distroless_debug_oci
    oss_arm64_deb --> oss_multiarch_distroless_oci
    oss_arm64_deb --> oss_multiarch_distroless_debug_oci
    oss_arm32_deb --> oss_multiarch_distroless_oci
    oss_arm32_deb --> oss_multiarch_distroless_debug_oci

    oss_src --> oss_binaries_linux_i386
        oss_binaries_linux_i386 --> oss_i386_deb
        oss_binaries_linux_i386 --> oss_i386_rpm
    oss_src --> oss_binaries_linux_arm64
        oss_binaries_linux_arm64 --> oss_arm64_deb
            oss_arm64_deb --> oss_arm64_oci
        oss_binaries_linux_arm64 --> oss_arm64_rpm
    oss_src --> oss_amd64_centos7
    oss_src --> oss_binaries_linux_arm32
        oss_binaries_linux_arm32 --> oss_arm32_deb
            oss_arm32_deb --> oss_arm32_oci
            oss_arm32_deb --> oss_multiarch_oci
        oss_binaries_linux_arm32 --> oss_arm32_rpm
    oss_src --> oss_darwin_amd64
        oss_darwin_amd64 --> darwin_oss_pkg_installer
        oss_darwin_amd64 --> darwin_tsh_only_pkg_installer
        oss_darwin_amd64 --> darwin_signed_tarball
        oss_darwin_amd64 --> darwin_unsigned_tarball

>         oss_darwin_amd64 --> darwin_teleport_connect_dmg

Author: Integrated

Some open questions are:

 - What tasks should an engineer be able to do at their desk?
   - Build binaries
   - Run Tests
 - Where is the boundary between
   - Desk/CI
   - Desk/Delivery
   - Using make vs Go vs GHA workflow (see below)
 - How much should we exercise the release system in CI?

#### **Buildbox management**

Whole separate RFD. General principles are:

  1. Stop rebuilding buildbox on every build. Rebuild on change to buildbox 
     content.
  2. All buildbox revisions are immutable and versioned. 
  3. All build automation must refer to expected buildbox unambiguously, so
     that rebuilds can happen in the context of the original build, not
     something that may ahve been subsequently altered.
  4. Build scripts must opt-in to updated buildboxes. No change will be thrust
     upon a build script.
  5. While we're dreaming, one multiarch buildbox for both CI and Delivery
     for any given revision of Teleport

#### **Prefer writing Go to any other method**

If at all possible, any even slightly complex task for either CI or 
the Delivery pipeline should be written in Go. Go is much less esoteric than
`bash` or `make`, and less prone to subtle bugs. 

> Go also avoid locking us into a vendor's build ourchestration system. We have

Reviewer 2: I would not say that is a property of using Go. It really is just making sure all the "build scripts" are independent of the CI system, and the CI system just calls them. Putting too much logic into the CI-specific build system makes it harder to migrate later, makes it harder to perform break-glass operations when CI is unavailable, and makes it harder to run locally to test.

Author: ```suggestion
Capturing processes _outside_ a vendor's build orchestration system is also a useful goal. We have
```

put a _lot_ of smarts about how to build a Teleport release into GitHub
workflows. What happens when the GHA outages become too much, or GHA somehow
becomes a liability rather than an asset?

#### **Examine creating a Release Engineering repo**

All of our GHA tooling currently lives in `teleport.e`. All of our Drone
tooling and Go release tooling lives in `teleport`. 

We chose `teleport.e` for GHA workflows because it was private, making it
harder to leak secrets though CI/CD, but those workflows exist there only
as an accident of history, not because that's the best place for them.

> Even if we *don't* separate our worklws and trooling out into a separate 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if we *don't* separate our workflows and tooling out into a separate 
```

repo, we should definitely think about a common pattern we can use to make
sure that everyone takes a consistent approach.

#### Separate CI, Delivery and test resources

Each resource should have exactly one purpose, so that changing it has

> no unforeseen consquences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no unforeseen consequences.
```

    end
```

> Note: As far as I can figure out, the contents of the `Release Artifact
> Bucket` are never actually read from anything. Release artifacts are served
> from the `Release API Server`'s CloudFront-backed CDN. 
>
> This bucket _may_ be required for build traceability, but could just as easily
> exist for legacy reasons (i.e. no-one wanted to delete it incase it broke
> something).

#### **Infrastructure**

Drone is entirely self hosted, we (Teleport) need to manage it ourselves. 

GHA, on the other hand, is largely managed for us by GitHub, although we
do use pools of ephemeral, self-hosted runners for specific tasks. 

We currently manage, as part of our CI/CD/Release system:
 - AWS EKS cluster running `Drone` (see `./drone` in the `ops` repository)
 - **Drone runners:**
    - 3x (one per actively supported major Teleport Version) AWS EC2 AMD64
      instances for Windows Builds
    - Intel MacMini in Macstadium
 - **Self-Hosted GHA Runners**
    - Ephemeral AWS EC2 arm64 boxes for arm64 linux builds. Pool has a max of 10
    instances
    - Ephemeral EC2 instance with a persistent volume for building `deb` 

>     and `rpm` packages.

Author: @fheinecke, @camscale - I'm pretty sure this is no longer valid. What are we doing now?
